JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
So, gentlemen, it's been
another tumultuous week,
on top of several others.
We have had the attorney general
of the United States testifying
before the Senate Intelligence
Committee.
And then we learned, I guess
in the last 48 hours, Mark,
that the investigation by the
special counsel into the
Russia meddling in the election
has been expanded to include
whether or not the
president committed
obstruction of justice.
Is this a one-alarm
crisis, two-alarm?
Are we making too
big a deal of this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, based
on what the president
- - how the president's
reacting, Judy, I don't
think we're making
too big a deal of it.
I mean, the president, having
acted briefly presidential after
the tragedy of the shooting
of Steve Scalise and the others
at the baseball field, has
reverted to form and gone back
to, as you reported at the
outset, now the man who told
me to fire the FBI director is
after me because -- is
investigating me because
of firing of the FBI
director, which is totally
contradictory to what the
president said to Lester Holt
on NBC, that the recommendation
of Rod Rosenstein had nothing
to do with his decision to fire
James Comey as FBI director,
that it was based solely on
Donald Trump's desire, as he
expressed to the Russians the
next day in the Oval
Office, to get the Russian
investigation behind him.
And so I just think that he is
behaving like a man who really
wants to fire Robert Mueller
and, you know, who didn't live
through October 20, 1973, when
President Nixon ordered Elliot
Richardson to fire Archibald
Cox and the independent counsel,
and he refused and resigned.
And William Rucklehaus,
his deputy, resigned.
And we had a
constitutional crisis.
And it led to
impeachment hearings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president is
calling it a witch-hunt, David.
The White House is saying
he didn't -- isn't going to
fire the special counsel.
But it isn't clear.
There have been
reports out about that.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, it
may be a witch-hunt, but
he's acting like a witch.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: To me, we have
had this -- the idea that there
has been collusion between
the Russians and the
Trump campaign has been
investigated for a long time.
And so far, we have had no
really serious evidence that
they did collude, and everything
else seems to be leaking out.
So, I begin to be a
little suspicious -- and
maybe I'm wrong -- we
will see over the long
term -- whether there was
any actual act of collusion.
There were certainly
conversations maybe
about some building and
some investment, but so
far, no evidence of
an underlying crime.
But this, to me, is
not a criminal story.
It is a psychological story.
And it's a story about
a president who seems to
be under more pressure,
under more threat,
lashing out in ways that are
painfully self-destructive,
but also extremely
disturbing to anybody around
him.
And so whether it's the North
Korean Cabinet hearing that
he held recently, where they
all had to praise him, or the
tweets as late as this morning,
this is not a president who
is projecting mental stability.
And the idea that he will
fire somebody, whether
it's Mueller or anybody
else, seems very plausible.
And so, to me, if there is
something really damaging here,
it's something that has not
yet happened caused by
the psychological pressure
that he apparently feels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is.
People are referring, are
reflecting back, Mark, to the
Whitewater investigation, the
Watergate investigation, that
what happened after the original
alleged crime made whatever
happened in the first
place much worse.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, the two
iron rules of Washington
scandals, Judy, is, it's never
the act itself.
Rule one, it's
always the cover-up.
And rule two is, everybody
always forgets rule one.
And that's -- but I think we
have got -- I'm not ready for
the clean bill of health yet.
We have got the transition to
go through and The New York
Times' Matt Apuzzo and Michael
Schmidt's story this week that
suggested that Robert Mueller
was looking at money laundering,
that this would have been the
way, through the Russians, that
had been -- the beneficiaries
had received their payments
through offshore banks.
This kind of opened up a
new avenue that's reported
in The New York Times.
And so I just think that,
Judy, the abject lack, absence
of curiosity on the part of
the president in his
nine conversations with
the FBI correct or any
other -- anybody else,
and with the attorney
general before the Senate
Intelligence Committee,
abject lack of curiosity
in how the Russians did it.
I mean, you would come in
and you say 17 intelligence
agencies have concluded
the Russians tried
to sabotage the American
electoral process, and
there's not a single
question about, what
did they do, how did they
do it, how can we avoid it,
what can we do in the future?
Geez, no, let's go, let's
find the three million
people who were illegally
voting in California
instead.
We will appoint a
commission for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, Mark
does have a point, David, that
when the attorney general was
asked about the -- a number
of things, one of the things
he said was that he had not
been briefed at all on
the Russia meddling.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And that's in part why
it's a psychological issue.
Every contact we know where
Donald Trump had conversations
about the Russia thing, he saw
through the prism of his
own victory and would he
get credit for the victory.
And it's perfectly plausible for
a normal human being to think,
well, I won the presidency,
but the Russians also did
seriously endanger interests,
the American political system,
and, therefore, I'm
going to go after that.
And so he -- but he's incapable
of seeing that second part.
It's just, am I getting
full credit for what
I think I achieved?
And so it's the intellectual
insecurity that I think
is overshadowing all else.
And that, by definition, can
spill -- this is why it's a
little different than Whitewater
and Watergate.
Nixon has his own psychological
complexities, but he was
someone who acted at least maybe
in Machiavellian ways, but in
straightforward, linear ways.
And, certainly, that
was true of Clinton.
With this team, no.
And then the second thing to
be said is, Clinton had very
competent people around him, and
so did Richard Nixon.
That's not the case here.
And you talked to the people
in the Clinton White House, it
was hell to be in that White
House.
They tried to build
these Chinese walls, so
they could do their jobs
while the investigation
was going on, and it was
super tough for them.
I imagine, especially when you
have got tweetstorms coming out,
it's near impossible to do your
job right now in any corner
of the Trump administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tweetstorms
from the president.
MARK SHIELDS: Just two
quick points, Judy.
And that is, Richard
Nixon was no Donald Trump.
I mean, Richard Nixon had
served four years in the United
States Navy as an officer, 14
years in the House and
the Senate, eight years
as vice president, and
was a constant reader
of history and biography, may
have been the best-prepared
president in terms of experience
in the history of the
nation, and has a record
of achievement that --
amply documented character
defects and criminal
activity, but a historic
record of achievement,
whether it's OSHA or
EPA or whatever else.
The two things that David's
mentioned, of that Cabinet
meeting, it was the most awkward
event I have seen in 50 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is when
he went around the table and
asked each Cabinet member...
MARK SHIELDS: To tell how
wonderful you were, not what I
did -- not only what I did on my
vacation, but how
wonderful you are.
And there wasn't a single
member of that Cabinet,
with the exception of
Jim Mattis, the secretary
of defense, who escaped with
his or her self-respect intact.
I mean, it was:
You're wonderful.
They love you in Mississippi.
You're doing a great job.
Everybody's better.
The economy is better.
Everything is terrific.
I mean, this was just
-- this was scary.
And the final thing was,
yesterday, he goes after Hillary
Clinton again, crooked Hillary.
I mean, he's trying to
rerun that 2016 election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, all
this takes place, David,
in a week when, as you
both have mentioned,
the shooting happened.
Republicans are practicing
for their annual
baseball game against the
Democrats in Congress,
and this man comes into
town from Illinois.
He ends up being killed,
grievously wounds
Congressman Steve Scalise,
still in the hospital
in critical condition.
After this, we see a coming
together of the parties.
I wanted to show a picture.
This is from the baseball game
last night, where you had --
or two nights ago -- where
you had the four leaders of
Congress there for once -- I
don't think we have ever seen
a picture like this -- coming
together looking like they at
least can tolerate each other.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And the thing that's symptomatic
of me -- for me is, I used
to think polarization was a
Washington phenomenon, that
the people on Capitol Hill
were polarized, but the country
was sort of still
a moderate nation.
But I think there is little
evidence to support that now.
This is a polarized country.
And most of the politicians
I know, members of Congress,
hate the system they're in.
They're stuck in a much
more polarized world than
they wish they were in.
And it's out of the country.
And that doesn't say the
shooter is any way symptomatic.
If anything, he's
an atypical nutcase.
But it is a sign on the fringes.
We have seen a ratcheting
up of violence.
We saw it, I thought, at the
conventions on both sides.
We saw it at the Trump
rallies on both sides.
And the people on the fringes
of society, we have just
seen a ratcheting up in their
feeling of justification
that they can resort
to violent means.
And this guy apparently
had a list of people,
according to what's being
reported this afternoon,
of people he wanted to shoot.
And so that's weaponizing
mentally disordered people
through the process of
political extremism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this
coming together at all, Mark?
Do you see any enduring --
any endurance of that, or is
that just -- is it just going
to be a blip?
MARK SHIELDS: You hope,
Judy, but to David's
point, both parties --
according to Pew Research,
in both parties, what drives
the most activist wing is not
support and energy and advocacy
of their own side.
It's loathing of the other side.
That's the gauge as to whether
you're going to be politically
involved, you're going to
vote, and whether you're going
to contribute, how much do you
loathe the other party, how
much do you hate them.
And there was a time, I will
be very blunt, when I came to
Washington, when the legitimacy
of your opponent was
never questioned.
You questioned their judgment.
You questioned their opinions
or their arguments, but
you never their legitimacy.
And that changed.
And it changed.
And one of the reasons
it changed is that a
man was elected from
the state of Georgia
who ran on the book, and the
book was, you use these words.
You use sick.
You refer pathetic, traitor,
liar, corrupt, shame,
enemy of normal Americans.
This was Newt Gingrich's bible.
It wasn't an idea of a policy.
It wasn't a program.
He used it and he
became successful.
He became speaker of the House.
Donald Trump is a
clone of Newt Gingrich.
Donald Trump used, Donald Trump,
lying Ted, and lightweight
Bobby Jindal, and Mitt Romney
choked like a dog, and
used that language.
And you're right.
The left has used similar
language and there has been a
response and almost a premium on
going after Trump in the
same sort of language.
But there's been no punishment.
There's no political
downside for this tactic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just 45 seconds.
Is one side more
responsible than another?
And are we going to
see any of this coming
together last, or is it...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, to me,
in 1970, people were asked,
would you mind it if your son
or daughter married someone
of the opposing party?
And 5 percent would mind.
Now 40 percent mind, because
people think your political
affiliation is a sign of your
worth, your values,
your philosophy, your
culture, your lifestyle.
It's everything.
All of a sudden, we have been
reduced to politics and we have
made politics into the ultimate
source of our souls.
And that's -- it's
just -- that's not
what it should bearing.
It's just about arguments
about tax rates.
It's not everything.
MARK SHIELDS:
That's a good point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields, thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.